---
author: Isaac
layout: post
title: 7 Best Shoes for Beginner Overweight Runners 2025
date: '2025-05-04T02:15:27+00:00'
categories:
- Product Reviews
- Running shoes
tags: []
slug: /best-shoes-for-beginner-overweight-runners/
lastmod: 2025-05-07T12:21:25+03:00
---
> **We may earn a commission when you click and buy from Amazon.com.**
>

---
Best Shoes for Beginner Overweight Runners should have a wide base, plenty of cushioning, correct shock absorption, and support.

If youre overweight and have decided to start running, this article is for you.
[Running](https://pestpolicy.com/best-shoes-for-running-on-pavement/)
is an excellent way of shedding excess weight, improving the health of your heart, and increasing your metabolism.

Therefore, Beginner Overweight Runners should invest in incorrect running shoes. Thus, Ive compiled the following list on some of the
[top Shoes](https://pestpolicy.com/best-stability-running-shoes-for-overpronators/)
for Beginner Overweight Runners.
## 7 Best Shoes for Beginner Overweight Runners
### [1. New Balance Men's 990 V5 Sneaker](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07L8L5KQF/?tag=p-policy-20)
The New Balance 990 V5 is a road running shoe thats boasts of innovative features and technologies. Most overweight runners agree that the shoe is responsive and comfortable.

The outsole features a durable Ndurance rubber compound thats located on the lateral area and heel section of the shoes outsole. The Ndurance rubber helps to extend the life of the shoe for a longer wear period.

The outsole of the NB 990 v5 also utilizes a blown rubber compound that provides extra cushioning while protecting the shoe from abrasion. The outsole also delivers reliable traction and grip.

The upper of the 990v5 features an open mesh and pigskin suede. The open mesh is a lightweight structure that allows air into the shoe for a dry and fresh feeling during running. The pigskin suede ensures additional comfort and durability.

ENCAP midsole technology offers superior cushioning, support, and durability. This technology helps to correct foot stability while ensuring the shoes durability.  The ABZORB foam also provides extra cushioning while encouraging a smooth heel to toe transition.
Pros:
- Excellent flexibility
- Exceptional cushioning and support
- Offers a snug fit
- Comfortable
- The best shoe for walking all-day
Cons:
- A person complained that the insole wears out quickly
### [2. HOKA ONE ONE Men's Clifton 5 Running Shoe](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0788T3GS8/?tag=p-policy-20)
If youre a first-time overweight runner HOKA ONE ONE Clifton 5 is a good running shoe to start your running exercises.  Most heavy runners are happy with their durable construction, supportive platform, and breathable upper.

Beginner Overweight Runners need well-cushioned shoes that would absorb shock properly while ensuring foot comfort. HOKA ONE ONE Clifton 5 features EVA foam on its midsole. The form provides cushioning and excellent shock absorption properties. The foot remains protected from the impact generated by your foot strike.

The Ortholite sockliner provides extra cushioning and great arch support. It also has antimicrobial properties that ensure the feet are in a safe and healthy environment.

The Meta-Rocker Geometry encourages forward movement while ensuring the runner maintains a natural movement for a smooth heel to toe transitions.

The HOKA ONE ONE Clifton 5 features an engineered mesh upper. The mesh has pores that allow air into the shoe for a cool and dry wear experience. The 3D Puff Print Frame design makes the upper visually engaging while ensuring its structural integrity.
Pros:
- Delivers soft cushioning
- Excellent breathability
- Quality design
- Highly durable
- Appealing color schemes
- Supportive underfoot platform
Cons:
- A customer complained that the shoe was narrow
### [3. Nike Women's Air Zoom Pegasus 36 Running Shoes](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07LDG13Y5/?tag=p-policy-20)
Nike Air Zoom Pegasus 36 is a neutral running shoe thats ideal for first time overweight runners. Its comfortable, supportive, and cushioned.

The upper of Pegasus 36 is highly breathable. The synthetic mesh holds the foot in place for a more comfortable run. The forefoot of Pegasus 36 is also roomy and can accommodate
[runners with wide feet.](https://pestpolicy.com/best-running-shoes-for-men-with-wide-feet/)
The Flywire cables along with the midfoot offer support while the heel counter holds the back of the foot in place.

The midsole features a Zoom Air unit that ensures smooth transitions as you run. The Pegasus 36 Cushlon foam technology that provides a firm and responsive cushioning. The technology allows plus-size runners to attain their running goals, as it provides crucial support to feet.

The outsole features a hard carbon rubber compound. This durable rubber provides protection against abrasion without compromising on grip or traction even on wet or slippery surfaces.

The forefoot offers great flexibility. It flexes naturally and quickly snaps back as you run. Thus, they are one of the best shoes for tempo runs. To ensure more flexibility, the Zoom Air unit is not very thick.

The Pegasus 36 is a dependable and consistent trainer that provides heavy runners with the stability they need during running. The midsole is near to the ground allowing your feet close contact with the surface. Thus, you can control your movements while remaining stable.
Pros:
- Excellent underfoot cushioning
- Smooth upper
- The upper secures the foot properly
- Reliable traction
- Lightweight
- Prevents accidental shoe removal
- Highly comfortable
Cons:
- A customer complained that they are not true to size
### [4. Brooks Men's Glycerin 14 Running Shoes](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B017MZAO0Q/?tag=p-policy-20)
As a beginner overweight runner, its crucial that you invest in shoes that are flexible, cushioned, and those that have good arch support. Brooks Glycerin 14 wont disappoint you.

The midsole uses Super DNA cushioning technology thats lightweight and responsive. This technology is distributed throughout the midsole and together with the midsole groves; they enhance the flexibility of the shoe for a smoother ride.

The outsole of Glycerin 14features a combination of flex grooves and rubber pods. Brooks places the pods strategically to help in shock absorption while ensuring a smoother and responsive ride.

The underfoot features full-blown rubber that aids in traction while the heel and other sections that are susceptible to damage have hard carbon rubber to ensure durability of the shoe.

The upper features an open mesh and some 3D overlays. The mesh upper has holes that make it highly breathable. The padded collar and tongue ensures additional comfort while the sockliner allows extra cushioning and support.

Therefore, if youre a beginner overweight runner, you need Brooks Glycerin 14 because of its excellent cushioning and comfort.
Pros:
- The plush interior ensures extra comfort
- Lightweight
- Reliable traction
- Excellent cushioning
- Unmatched flexibility
- Great arch support
- Can use orthotics
- Highly durable
Cons:
- Pricey
- Some wearers complained that its runs a bit small
### [5. ASICS Women's Gel-Kayano 26 Running Shoes](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07S9L1NY4/?tag=p-policy-20)
ASICS Gel-Kayano 26 is a solid running shoe that offers excellent midsole cushioning, unmatched durability, comfort, and stability. Heavy runners with overpronation will love the support that this shoe offers.

The uppers feature a soft jacquard mesh material. The upper material has pores throughout that aid in breathability. The front section is also spacious enough and can accommodate wide-footed runners.

The insole is anatomically shaped;   hence, it mimics the natural shape of your feet. Therefore, youll experience a natural and comfortable ride. The Guidance Trusstic System averts ankle twists especially when running on uneven surfaces.

The midsole of Kayano 26 features a great mix of Gel, Flyte Foam Lyte, and Flyte Foam Propel. Flytefoam Lyte offers excellent shock absorption protection every step you take.  The heel and forefoot areas feature Flyte Foam Propel that encourages softer and more responsive foot landings. The gel provides extra cushioning and shock attenuation.

The Dynamic Duomax located on the midsole controls pronation. The system ensures the feet dont collapse inwards as you run. The external heel counter ensures the rearfoot is well secured and the heel remains stable during running.
Pros:
- Excellent cushioning
- Excellent stability
- The best shoe for overweight flat feet runners
- Breathable upper
- Durable shoe
- Comfortable
Cons:
- Pricey
- Tight toe box according to some reviews
## Conclusion
Beginner plus size runners are susceptible to injuries. The injuries may come since your feet carries the excess body weight that can cause muscles or ligaments strain. Therefore, if you plan to start running, it crucial for heavy men and women to invest in best shoes for beginner overweight runners.
